>> Woodruff: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT LAUNCHES A BROAD
CIVIL RIGHTS INVESTIGATION INTO
THE ACTIONS OF POLICE IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI AFTER THE
DEATH OF AN UNARMED TEEN.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, FORGET
ESSAYS, STANDARDIZED TEST SCORES
AND HIGH SCHOOL TRANSCRIPTS.
WHY ONE COLLEGE IS TURNING TWO
MINUTE VIDEOS TO SIMPLIFY
ADMISSIONS.
WHAT SCIENTISTS CAN DO TO
PREVENT WATER IN THE GREAT LAKES
FROM TURNING TOXIC FROM ALGAE.
>> I'VE SEEN THESE BEFORE BUT
I'D NEVER SEEN A BLOOM WHERE
WHEN YOU HIT IT WITH A BOAT, IT
ACTUALLY SLOWED YOU DOWN.
IT WAS THAT DENSE.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, AS THE N.F.L.
SEASON KICKS OFF, WE LOOK AT
WHAT PRO FOOTBALL IS DOING TO
PROTECT ITS PLAYERS FROM
CONCUSSIONS.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: NATO CONVENED A
SUMMIT TODAY, CONFRONTING THE
WAR IN UKRAINE AND THE SHARPEST
TENSIONS WITH RUSSIA SINCE COLD
WAR DAYS.
BUT THERE WAS NEW HOPE FOR A
POSSIBLE PEACE ACCORD.
>> ( translated ): TOMORROW, THE
MEETING WILL TAKE PLACE IN
MINSK.
I WILL ADDRESS AND GIVE AN ORDER
TO THE MILITARY HEADQUARTERS FOR
CEASE-FIRE.
>> Woodruff: WORD THAT A TRUCE
IS IN THE OFFING CAME FROM
UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT PETRO
POROSHENKO, AS HE JOINED NATO
LEADERS IN WALES.
THEY CONVENED A DAY AHEAD OF THE
MINSK MEETING INVOLVING UKRAINE,
RUSSIA AND UKRAINIAN REBELS.
>> UKRAINE WANTS PEACE, UKRAINE
NEVER WANTED A WAR AND IS TIRED
OF IT.
AND WE'LL DO EVERYTHING POSSIBLE
TO BRING PEACE TO OUR LAND.
THE FIRST STEP FOR PEACE IS A
CEASE-FIRE.
>> Woodruff: IN UKRAINE,
FIGHTING CONTINUED, EVEN AS THE
HEAD OF THE MAIN REBEL GROUP, IN
DONESTSK, SAID "HE, TOO, IS
WILLING TO DECLARE A TRUCE."
TO THE SOUTH, UKRAINIAN FORCES
WERE ON HIGH ALERT AROUND THE
MAJOR PORT OF MARIUPOL AMID
REPORTS OF EXPLOSIONS ON THE
CITY OUTSKIRTS.
>> UKRAINE HAS STOOD BY NATO.
NOW, IN THESE DIFFICULT TIMES,
NATO STANDS BY UKRAINE.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN WALES, NATO
SECRETARY GENERAL ANDERS FOGH
RASMUSSEN MADE CLEAR THE
ALLIANCE WILL RESIST RUSSIAN
PRESSURE ON UKRAINE.
>> RUSSIA MUST STOP ITS
AGGRESSIVE ACTIONS AGAINST
UKRAINE, WITHDRAW ITS THOUSANDS
OF TROOPS FROM UKRAINE AND THE
BORDER REGIONS, AND STOP
SUPPORTING THE SEPARATISTS IN
UKRAINE.
>> Woodruff: UKRAINE IS ASKING
TO JOIN NATO, BUT IN MOSCOW
TODAY, RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER
SERGEI LAVROV WARNED ANY SUCH
MOVE COULD DERAIL PEACE EFFORTS.
>> ( translated ): THE OUTBURST
OF ANTI-RUSSIAN RHETORIC, THAT
WE OBSERVE AT THE VERY MOMENT
WHEN THE MOST ACTIVE EFFORTS ARE
BEING MADE TO FIND A POLITICAL
SETTLEMENT, MEANS ONLY THAT THE
WAR PARTY, WHICH IS SITUATED IN
KIEV, RECEIVES ACTIVE SUPPORT
FROM THE OUTSIDE, IN THIS CASE
FROM THE UNITED STATES.
>> Woodruff: ALONG WITH UKRAINE,
THE SUMMIT NATIONS ALSO MEAN TO
ADDRESS THE THREAT POSED BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA.
IN A JOINT "TIMES OF LONDON"
GUEST ARTICLE TODAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND BRITISH
PRIME MINISTER DAVID CAMERON
WROTE:
"IF TERRORISTS THINK WE WILL
WEAKEN IN THE FACE OF THEIR
THREATS, THEY COULD NOT BE MORE
WRONG.
COUNTRIES LIKE BRITAIN AND
AMERICA WILL NOT BE COWED BY
BARBARIC KILLERS."
NATO CHIEF RASMUSSEN SAID THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY HAS AN
OBLIGATION TO STOP THE MILITANTS
FROM ADVANCING.
AND HE SAID ALLIES WOULD
SERIOUSLY CONSIDER AN IRAQI
REQUEST FOR HELP.
HE ALSO WARNED TIME IS RUNNING
OUT FOR A DEAL KEEPING U.S. AND
OTHER TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN,
PAST THE END OF THE YEAR.
>> NATO ALLIES AND PARTNERS
STAND READY TO LAUNCH A NEW NON-
COMBAT MISSION TO TRAIN, ADVISE
AND ASSIST THE AFGHAN FORCES
FROM NEXT YEAR, WHEN THE
REQUIRED LEGAL FRAMEWORK IS IN
PLACE, BUT WE STAND READY.
WITHOUT A SIGNATURE, THERE CAN
BE NO MISSION.
>> Woodruff: WHOEVER BECOMES
PRESIDENT OF AFGHANISTAN WILL
HAVE TO PROVIDE THAT SIGNATURE,
BUT A CONTESTED ELECTION HAS
LEFT THE COUNTRY WITHOUT A CLEAR
LEADER.
ABDULLAH ABDULLAH AND ASHRAF
GHANI PROMISED AGAIN TODAY TO
ACHIEVE A NATIONAL UNITY
GOVERNMENT.
MEANWHILE, TALIBAN INSURGENTS
ATTACKED A GOVERNMENT COMPOUND
IN EASTERN AFGHANISTAN, KILLING
AT LEAST A DOZEN.
AND IN A STATEMENT THE MILITANTS
TAUNTED NATO AND PROCLAIMED ITS
AFGHAN MISSION A HISTORICAL
SHAME.
THE NATO SUMMIT CONCLUDES
TOMORROW.
A FEDERAL JUDGE RULED TODAY THAT
B.P. OIL COMPANY BEARS THE
LION'S SHARE OF RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE GULF OF MEXICO OIL SPILL
IN 2010.
30% OF THE LEGAL BLAME WENT TO
THE OIL RIG OWNER, TRANSOCEAN,
AND THREE PERCENT TO CEMENT
CONTRACTOR HALLIBURTON.
THE RULING COULD MEAN B.P. WILL
PAY FOUR TIMES THE CIVIL
PENALTIES IT WAS ORIGINALLY
ASSESSED OR, UP TO NEARLY $18
BILLION.
THE ENERGY GIANT SAID IT WILL
APPEAL.
A FEDERAL APPEALS COURT IN
WASHINGTON WILL RECONSIDER A
CHALLENGE TO TAX CREDITS UNDER
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE LAW.
A THREE JUDGE PANEL FROM THE
COURT HAD LIMITED THE SUBSIDIES
TO THE 14 STATES THAT RUN THEIR
OWN HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES.
THE ADMINISTRATION APPEALED, AND
THE FULL APPEALS COURT HAS NOW
AGREED TO TAKE UP THE MATTER.
THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PLACED
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY ON ALERT
TODAY AFTER AL QAEDA ANNOUNCED
IT'S EXPANDING INTO THE
SUBCONTINENT.
THE GROUP'S LEADER, AYMAN AL-
ZAWAHRI, ISSUED A VIDEOTAPED
MESSAGE.
>> ( translated ): MY MUSLIM
BROTHERS EVERYWHERE, I ANNOUNCE
TO ALL MUSLIMS IN THE WORLD AND
ESPECIALLY IN THE INDIAN
SUBCONTINENT, THE FOUNDING OF A
NEW BRANCH.
THIS IS TO HELP RAISE THE FLAG
OF JIHAD AND THE RETURN OF THE
ISLAMIC RULE IN THE
SUBCONTINENT.
>> Woodruff: AL-ZAWAHRI CHARGED
MUSLIMS IN INDIA HAVE LONG BEEN
SUBJECT TO INJUSTICE AND
OPPRESSION BY THE HINDU
MAJORITY.
AL QAEDA HAS RECENTLY BEEN
OVERSHADOWED BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE, AN OFFSHOOT THAT BROKE
TIES WITH THE MAIN GROUP LAST
YEAR.
FAST FOOD WORKERS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WALKED OFF THE JOB
TODAY.
STAGING ONE OF THE BIGGEST
PROTESTS YET OVER PAY.
THEY DEMANDING HOURLY WAGES BE
DOUBLED TO $15 DOLLARS.
ORGANIZERS SAID EMPLOYEES AND
SUPPORTERS WERE TAKING TO THE
STREETS IN MORE THAN 150 CITIES.
FROM NEW YORK TO DETROIT TO LAS
VEGAS, DOZENS OF PEOPLE WERE
ARRESTED, LARGELY FOR BLOCKING
ROADWAYS.
INTERNATIONAL MONITORS ARE
CALLING FOR CUTTING THE CATCH OF
JUVENILE BLUEFIN TUNA IN THE
PACIFIC BY HALF TO SAVE THE
SPECIES.
THE WESTERN AND CENTRAL PACIFIC
FISHERIES COMMISSION RECOMMENDED
THE MOVE TODAY.
IT ALSO ENDORSED NEW CATCH
LIMITS ON ADULT TUNA.
THE MOVE WILL LIKELY HIT HARDEST
IN JAPAN, WHICH CONSUMES 80% OF
THE WORLD'S BLUEFIN TUNA.
GOOGLE AGREED TODAY TO REFUND
AT LEAST $19 MILLION IN CHARGES
RACKED UP BY CHILDREN PAYING
VIDEO GAMES ON MOBILE DEVICES.
THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
SAID CURRENTLY, CHILDREN CAN RUN
UP HUNDREDS OF DOLLARS ON THEIR
PARENTS' CREDIT CARDS WITHOUT
PERMISSION.
IN SOME SURPRISE ECONOMIC NEWS,
THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK CUT
INTEREST RATES AND ANNOUNCED A
NEW STIMULUS PROGRAM IN A BID TO
STAVE OFF A NEW RECESSION.
BUT THAT EUROPEAN RATE CUT
DIDN'T BOOST STOCKS IN THIS
COUNTRY TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST EIGHT POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,069.
THE NASDAQ FELL TEN POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,562.
THE S&P 500 DROPPED THREE POINTS
TO CLOSE AT 1,997.
COMEDIAN JOAN RIVERS DIED TODAY
IN A NEW YORK HOSPITAL, A WEEK
AFTER SUFFERING A HEART ATTACK.
RIVERS GAINED FAME IN THE 1960'S
FOR HER BITING BUT FUNNY
INSULTS, AND BY THE '80'S, SHE
BROKE THROUGH THE MALE-DOMINATED
WORLD OF LATE-NIGHT TALK SHOWS.
IN LATER YEARS, SHE TRANSFORMED
RED CARPET RUNWAYS AT THE
OSCARS, EMMYS AND GOLDEN GLOBES,
FIRING AWAY AT CELEBRITIES FOR
THEIR BAD FASHION SENSE.
JOAN RIVERS WAS 81-YEARS-OLD.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT LAUNCHES
A NEW INVESTIGATION OF THE
FERGUSON POLICE DEPARTMENT
A MARYLAND COLLEGE DECIDES TO
ACCEPT TWO MINUTE VIDEO
APPLICATIONS.
TWO BIG POLITICAL STORIES FROM
VIRGINIA AND KANSAS.
SCIENTISTS SEARCH FOR WAYS TO
PREVENT TOXIC ALGAE IN OUR
DRINKING WATER.
AND, ASSESSING THE N.F.L.'S NEW
SAFETY REGULATIONS DESIGNED TO
PREVENT CONCUSSIONS.
>> Woodruff: U.S. ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER ANNOUNCED
TODAY THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE IS LAUNCHING A FULL-
BLOWN FEDERAL CIVIL RIGHTS
INVESTIGATION OF THE ENTIRE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI.
FOLLOWING THE FATAL SHOOTING OF
A BLACK TEENAGER BY A WHITE
OFFICER.
>> THERE'S CAUSE FOR THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TO OPEN AN
INVESTIGATION TO DETERMINE
WHETHER FERGUSON POLICE
OFFICIALS HAVE ENGAGED IN A
PATTERN OR PRACTICE OF
VIOLATIONS OF THE UNITED STATES
CONSTITUTION OR FEDERAL LAW.
>> Woodruff: ATTORNEY GENERAL
ERIC HOLDER'S ANNOUNCEMENT CAME
JUST SHORT OF A MONTH SINCE THE
DEATH OF MICHAEL BROWN, WHO WAS
18 AND UNARMED.
THE KILLING SPARKED WEEKS OF
PROTESTS IN FERGUSON, AND OFTEN-
VIOLENT CLASHES WITH POLICE.
HOLDER WENT TO THE ST. LOUIS
SUBURB HIMSELF ON AUGUST 20TH TO
MEET WITH COMMUNITY LEADERS AND
BROWN'S FAMILY
>> WHEN I VISITED FERGUSON TWO
WEEKS AGO, I PROMISED THAT THE
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE WOULD CONTINUE TO STAND
WITH THE PEOPLE THERE LONG AFTER
THE NATIONAL HEADLINES HAD
FADED.
>> Woodruff: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS ALREADY
INVESTIGATING THE
CONFRONTATION THAT LED TO THE
SHOOTING OF BROWN AT LEAST SIX
TIMES BY POLICE OFFICER DARREN
WILSON.
THIS NEW PROBE WILL EXAMINE
RECENT POLICE PRACTICES IN
FERGUSON, FOR ANY PATTERNS OF
RACIAL BIAS, EXCESSIVE USE OF
FORCE AND OTHER PROBLEMS.
>> THE VAST MAJORITY OF PEOPLES
WHO ARE IN LAW ENFORCEMENT, VAST
MAJORITY OF POLICE DEPARTMENTS
DO THEIR JOB IN A WAY THAT WE
WOULD EXPECT.
BUT TO THE EXTENT THAT THERE ARE
PROBLEMS, I THINK WE AS A
SOCIETY NEED TO HAVE THE GUTS TO
SAY, YOU KNOW, WE'RE GOING TO
IDENTIFY THIS AS A PROBLEM.
THIS IS A DEFICIENCY IN OUR
COUNTRY AND WE'RE GOING TO MAKE
IT BETTER.
>> Woodruff: FERGUSON POLICE
CHIEF THOMAS JACKSON MET WITH
FEDERAL OFFICIALS YESTERDAY, AND
SAID HE WOULD WELCOME THE
INVESTIGATION.
HE SAID HIS DEPARTMENT HAS NO
INTENTIONAL POLICIES THAT LEND
THEMSELVES TO DISCRIMINATION,
BUT THERE IS A BROAD RACIAL
DISPARITY BETWEEN THE FORCE, AND
THE CITY IT POLICES.
FERGUSON, WITH A POPULATION OF
20,000, IS TWO-THIRDS AFRICAN
AMERICAN.
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT HAS 53
OFFICERS AND ONLY FOUR OF THEM
ARE BLACK.
A 2013 REPORT, BY THE MISSOURI
ATTORNEY GENERAL, FOUND FERGUSON
POLICE STOPPED AND ARRESTED
BLACK DRIVERS NEARLY TWICE AS
FREQUENTLY AS THEY STOPPED WHITE
DRIVERS.
IN RECENT YEARS, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT HAS STEPPED UP ITS
OWN INVESTIGATIONS OF POLICE
AGENCIES.
THERE'VE BEEN 20 SUCH
INVESTIGATIONS IN THE PAST FIVE
YEARS, INCLUDING HIGH-PROFILE
PROBES IN NEW ORLEANS AND
ALBUQUERQUE.
THAT IS MORE THAN DOUBLE THE
NUMBER IN THE PREVIOUS FIVE
YEARS.
WE GET SOME INSIGHT ON HOW THIS
INVESTIGATION MIGHT PLAY OUT
WITH:
ROBERT DRISCOLL, A FORMER DEPUTY
ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL IN
THE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE DURING THE
GEORGE W. BUSH ADMINISTRATION.
HE'S NOW A PARTNER AT THE FIRM
FRIEDLANDER MISLER IN
WASHINGTON.
AND TRACIE KEESEE, CO-FOUNDER OF
THE U.C.L.A. CENTER FOR POLICING
EQUITY AND A 25 YEAR VETERAN
POLICE OFFICER.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
"NewsHour".
ROBERT DRISCOLL, TO YOU FIRST,
HOW IS AN INVESTIGATION LIKE
THIS DIFFERENT FROM THE OTHER
INVESTIGATIONS THAT ARE UNDERWAY
ON WHAT HAPPENED INRG
>> THIS INVESTIGATION WON'T LOOK
AT ANY INDIVIDUAL INSTANCE.
THEY'RE REALLY LOOKING FOR
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES AND
PATTERNS OF POSSIBLE
UNCONSTITUTIONAL BEHAVIOR BY THE
FERGUSON POLICE DEPARTMENT.
SO THEY'LL BE LOOKING AT DATA
AND LOOKING AT SCORES OF
INCIDENT REPORTS AND REVIEWING
THAT WITH POLICING EXPERTS
FILTERING IN TO REACH
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT WHETHER THERE
ARE UNCONSTITUTIONAL PRACTICES
THAT CAN BE CHANGED.
SO THERE'S NO RISK OF ANYONE
GOING TO JAIL AT THE END OF THE
NO MONEY
DAMAGES PAID.
WHAT THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
WILL BE SEEKING IS REFORMS OF
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IF THEY
FIND A PATTERN AND THEY WILL GET
THAT THROUGH A MEMORANDUM OF
AGREEMENT OR FORCED COURT
DEGREE.
>> Woodruff: I TOOK NOTES AT
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S NEWS
CONFERENCE TODAY AND THEY SAID
THEY WILL BE LOOKING AT SEVERAL
THINGS -- EXCESSIVE USE OF
FORCE, STOPS, SEARCHES, ARRESTS,
TREATMENT OF DETAINEES IN JAIL
AND DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
GENERALLY.
CAN YOU FLUSH OUT FOR US WHAT
EXACTLY THEY ARE LOOKING AT AT
THE DEPARTMENT?
ARE THEY LOOKING AT POLICE
RECORDS, WHETHER INTERVIEWING
PEOPLE?
HOW DOES THIS WORK?
>> IT'S A COMBINATION OF THOSE
THINGS.
AS STATED BEFORE, YOU HAVE TO
LOOK BACK.
IF YOU'RE LOOKING FOR PATTERNS
AND PRACTICES, YOU HAVE TO LOOK
BACK A WAY.
SITH WON'T BE WHAT JUST HAPPENED
IN THE LAST YEAR.
YOU'RE TRYING TO DETERMINE IF
ANY OF THE POLICIES ARE
INFLUENCING THE WAY OFFICERS ON
THE STREET MAKE THEIR DECISIONS.
THEY LOOK AT USE OF FORCE,
TRAINING, LOOKING AT THE
COMMUNITY, DISCUSSIONS
INTERNALLY IN THE ORGANIZATION.
SO THEY WILL LOOK AT A MYRIAD OF
THINGS TO GET A GOOD PICTURE OF
WHAT'S GOING ON IN REGARDS
POLICING IN FERGUSON.
>> Woodruff: I'M CURIOUS,
ROBERT DRISCOLL, TO SEE HOW IT
WORKS.
YOU HAVE THE BIG JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
INVESTIGATING A 53-PERSON POLICE
DEPARTMENT IN THE LITTLE CITY OF
FERGUSON, A SUBURB OF ST. LOUIS,
AND WE'RE TRYING TO GET ARMS
AROUND HOW THIS WORKS.
DID THEY SEND A FLEET OF PEOPLE
IN THERE OVER A PERIOD OF YEARS
TO DO INTERVIEWS?
HOW DOES IT WORK?
>> IT WON'T TAKE YEARS BUT
CERTAINLY WEEKS AND WELL INTO
MONTHS.
THEY'LL SEND IN A TEAM OF MAYBE
FOUR TO FIVE OR SIX D.O.J. CIVIL
RIGHTS ATTORNEYS AND MAYBE A
LEAD EXPERT AND MAYBE A SECOND
EXPERT TO LOOK AT THE JAILS AND
INTERVIEW COMMAND STAFF AT THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
THIS IS A VERY SMALL POLICE
DEPARTMENT FOR ONE OF THESE
INVESTIGATIONS, SO IT WILL BE A
LITTLE CHALLENGING TO FIND
PATTERNS AND PRACTICES.
THIS ISN'T A DEPARTMENT LIKE
DETROIT, NEW YORK CITY OR
NEW ORLEANS THAT YOU HAVE ENOUGH
DATA TO SEE TRENDS.
WITH 53 OFFICERS, IT WILL BE A
LITTLE MORE CHALLENGING.
BUT THEY WILL LOOK AT HOW THE
OFFICERS ARE TRAINED AND LOOK AT
POLICIES AND SEE WHAT THEY FIND.
>> Woodruff: TRACIE KEESEE,
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO THAT IN
TERMS OF WHAT THEY'RE LOOKING AT
AND HOW THIS WILL WORK?
>> THESE THINGS WILL BE CRITICAL
BUT THEY WILL ALSO SPEAK WITH
THE COMMUNITY WHICH IS ANOTHER
PIECE.
WHAT THEY HAVE IN A LOT OF SMALL
DEPARTMENTS IS TURNOVER.
SO HO HOW MANY OFFICERS COME
THROUGH THERE.
WHAT WE'VE TALKED ABOUT SINCE
FERGUSON BEGAN WAS DIVERSITY,
THE ABILITY TO RECRUIT AND
RETAIN.
ALL THOSE THINGS WILL BE ON THE
TABLE.
WHAT ARE THE RECRUITMENT
POLICIES, HOW DO YOU HIRE
PEOPLE, SO THAT WILL BE ANOTHER
ASPECT AS WELL.
THE COMMUNITY COMPONENT WILL
REALLY ADDED A ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION TO THAT
INVESTIGATION.
>> Woodruff: I WAS ACTUALLY
SURPRISED AT THIS NEWS
CONFERENCE TODAY.
THEY SAID HIRING PRACTICES WERE
NOT SOMETHING THEY WERE GOING TO
INITIALLY LOOK AT.
WHY WOULD THAT BE?
>> I THINK THAT'S LIKELY AN
INTERNAL JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
MATTER AND A SEPARATE SECTION OF
THE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION THAT
HAPPENED ALSO EMPLOYMENT AND
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT AND THEY WILL
HAVE TO OPEN UP A SEPARATE
MATTER TO DO THAT.
THEY CERTAINLY HAVE THE
AUTHORITY TO DO THAT BROADLY
WHEN LOOKING AT THE D.O.J. AS A
WHOLE.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AS A WHOLE
COULD DIRECT AN INVESTIGATION AT
SOME POINT IF THEY GET
UNEMPLOYMENT DATA THEY DON'T
LIKE.
BUT THIS UNIT OF LAWYERS LIKELY
WON'T BE LOOKING AT THE
EMPLOYMENT ASPECT OF IT
DIRECTLY.
THEY COULD BE LOOKING AT
RACIALLY BIASED POLICING AND
MAYBE GET AT IT THAT WAY BUT THE
DIRECT EMPLOYMENT MATTER WOULD
BE DIFFERENT.
>> Woodruff: TRACIE KEESEE.
I WOULD ADD THAT PART THE
COMMUNITY CONVERSATION WILL BE
ABOUT THE TYPE OF POLICING THAT
THE COMMUNITY SHOULD HAVE AND I
THINK THAT WILL BE CRITICAL AS
WELL.
TO ME, THAT'S WHAT YOU LOOK AT
WHEN YOU'RE TRYING TO HIRE
PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: WILL THERE BE
OVERLAP, MS. KEESEE, WITH THE
GRAND JURY INVESTIGATION ALREADY
UNDERWAY AND THE OTHER
INVESTIGATIONS UNDERWAY IN WHAT
HAPPENED LAST MONTH IN THE DEATH
OF MICHAEL BROWN?
>> FROM MY UNDERSTANDING, THIS
IS SEPARATE.
THIS IS BEYOND WHAT'S GOING ON
WITH THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION.
AND THE POLICIES OF THEPERATIONS
DEPARTMENT.
THOSE ARE TWO SEPARATE THINGS.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW, ROBERT
DRISCOLL, I THINK YOU WERE
SUGGESTING A MINUTE AGO IT'S NOT
INTENDED TO LEAD TO CRIMINAL
PROSECUTION, IT'S TO REFORMS IN
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
WE KNOW THIS JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
HAS ALREADY INVESTIGATED OTHER
HIGH-PROFILE POLICE DEPARTMENTS
IN THE COUNTRY.
DO THOSE INVESTIGATIONS CHANGE
THE WAY THESE DEPARTMENTS WORK?
>> THEY CAN OVER TIME.
IT'S A LONG PROCESS.
THIS IS NOT -- IT'S A LONG
PROCESS.
THE INVESTIGATIONS TAKE A WHILE.
THEY CAN TAKE OVER A YEAR TO
REACH FINDINGS AND THEN
NEGOTIATE A RESOLUTION WITH THE
CITY.
IT DEPENDS ON WHAT THEY FIND.
WE CAN'T FORGET THERE'S A
POSSIBILITY THEY WON'T FIND THAT
THE FERGUSON POLICE
DEPARTMENT -- THEY TO TIE
TO DO IN
UNCONN'SLE ACTS TO THE
DEPARTMENT AND HAVE TO FIND
ENOUGH FOR A PATTERN AND
PRACTICE AND NIA
SETTLEMENT.
SO THE REFORMS TAKE TIME AND
ONCE IMPLEMENTED TAKE TIME TO
TAKE HOLD BECAUSE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT CHANGING A CULTURE IF THEY
HAVE A PARENT OF
UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDUCT.
>> Woodruff: TRACIE KEESEE,
HOW DO YOU SEE SOMETHING LIKE
THAT UNFOLDING?
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY WILL END
UP RECOMMENDING, BUT IF THERE IS
A MEMO OF OUNCING, IS THAT WHAT
IT'S CALLED, AT THE END OF THIS
PROCESS?
HOW DOES THAT WORK?
>> ABSOLUTELY AND ESPECIALLY IF
THE ORGANIZATION IS COOPERATIVE
AND THEY CAN COME TO AN
AGREEMENT.
FOR MOST AGENCIES, THAT'S THE
BEST WAY TO GO.
I THINK WE'VE HEARD DURING THE
INTERVIEW THAT FERGUSON P.D. IS
MORE THAN OPEN AND WILLING TO
LOOK AT WHAT THEY HAVE GOING ON
AND MAKE CHANGES THAT WILL HELP
THEIR FORM OF POLICING.
AS STATED, THESE THINGS TAKE
TIME, AND THE PROBLEM WITH THAT
IS OFTEN THE COMMUNITY DOESN'T
TAKE FOR THOSENCE FOR THE TIME
INVESTIGATIONS AND THOSE INITIAL
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CHANGES OF
POLICIES.
AND IT'S NOT JUST THE CHANGES.
THEY DO HAVE TO TAKE HOLD.
SO YOU HAVE TO HAVE SOME
SUSTAINMENT THERE OVER A PERIOD
OF TIME.
>> Woodruff: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED THIS
INVESTIGATION JUST A MONTH AFTER
THE INITIAL SHOOTING.
THANKS TO YOU BOTH FOR JOINING
US, TRACIE KEESEE AND ROBERT
DRISCOLL, WE APPRECIATE IT.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: SO IMAGINE YOU HAVE
TWO MINUTES TO MAKE YOUR CASE
FOR WHY YOU SHOULD BE ACCEPTED
TO A COLLEGE.
AND TO DO THAT, ALL YOU HAVE TO
DO IS SUBMIT A SHORT VIDEO YOU
RECORDED ON YOUR CELLPHONE.
THAT'S BEEN UNHEARD OF UNTIL
NOW.
TODAY, A LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE
ANNOUNCED ITS PLAN TO DO JUST
THAT.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY AND
LOOKS AT HOW THIS MOVE FITS INTO
A CHANGING LANDSCAPE OF
ADMISSIONS IN HIGHER EDUCATION.
>> Reporter: IF YOU'RE APPLYING
TO GOUCHER COLLEGE IN MARYLAND,
YOU WON'T HAVE TO PUT TOGETHER
THAT TRADITIONAL AND SOMETIMES
DAUNTING APPLICATION PACKET.
NO TRANSCRIPTS.
NO RECOMMENDATIONS.
NO LIST OF EXTRACURRICULAR
ACTIVITIES.
AND NONE OF THE USUAL ACADEMIC
SCORES.
INSTEAD, GOUCHER, A SMALL
LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE, ANNOUNCED
IT WILL ACCEPT A TWO MINUTE
VIDEO SUBMISSION.
IT'S A RADICAL CHANGE.
AND THE SCHOOL PUT TOGETHER A
VIDEO OF ITS OWN TO EXPLAIN THE
THINKING.
HERE'S A CLIP.
>> THAT'S IT!
NO TEST SCORES, NO TRANSCRIPTS.
>> WE'RE MORE THAN JUST A
NUMBER.
>> I'M MORE THAN JUST A NUMBER.
A NUMBER.
AT GOUCHER, YOU'RE MORE THAN
JUST A NUMBER.
THAT'S WHY WE'VE CREATED THE
GOUCHER'S VIDEO APP, A BRAND-NEW
AND TOTALLY UNIQUE WAY TO APPLY
FOR COLLEGE.
>> Brown: THAT WAS JOSE
>> Reporter: JOSE ANTONIO BOWEN
IS THE NEW PRESIDENT OF GOUCHER
COLLEGE.
HE JOINS ME FOR MORE ABOUT
WHAT'S BEHIND THE CHANGE AND THE
QUESTIONS BEING RAISED ABOUT
THIS OPTION.
NKNING US.
YOU'RE SAYING YOU'RE DOING THIS
IN A CONTEXT IN WHICH THE
ADMISSIONS MODEL IS BROKEN.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
BROKEN HOW?
>> SURE.
WELL, THE COLLEGE ADMISSIONS
PROCESS IS BROKEN IN TWO
FUNDAMENTAL WAYS.
THE FIRST PROBLEM IS CALLED"UNDE
THOUSANDS, TENS OF THOUSANDS,
EVEN, OF HIGH-ACHIEVING BUT
USUALLY LOW-INCOME, OFTEN
MINORITY STUDENTS WHO ACTUALLY
HAVE THE GRADES AND HAVE THE
CREDENTIALS TO GO TO A SELECTIVE
LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE LIKE
GOUCHER COLLEGE BUT, INSTEAD,
THEY DON'T APPLY TO ANY, NOT
ONE, ZERO.
THEY APPLY TO NO LIBERAL ARTS
COLLEGES.
THEY MIGHT GO TO COMMUNITY
COLLEGE, THEY MIGHT NOT GO TO
COLLEGE AT ALL.
SO WE'RE MISSING TO PENSIONLE
THERE.
BUT WE'RE MISSING POTENTIAL IN A
SECOND WAY, TOO.
SO TEST SCORES AND GRADES ARE
PREDICTIVE AND GOUCHER COLLEGE
WILL CONTINUE TO ACCEPT THOSE.
SO IF YOU WANT TO USE YOUR TEST
SCORES AND GRADES IN THE COMMON
APP, WE DO THAT.
BUT THERE ARE STUDENTS, LIKE ME,
WHO MIFFED OTHER CONCERNS DURING
HIGH SCHOOL.
LIFE SOMETIMES INTERVENES, AND
TEST SCORES ARE NOT A PERFECT
WAY TO PREDICT WHO'S GOING TO BE
SUCCESSFUL IN LIFE.
THERE ARE LOTS OF PEOPLE WHO
DON'T TEST WELL, THE PARENTS GOT
DIVORCED.
I HAD A GREAT GIG THE NIGHT
BEFORE THE SATs, AND I DIDN'T
ACTUALLY VEALS THE SATs WERE
THAT IMPORTANT TO THE REST OF MY
LIFE AT THAT POINT.
I THOUGHT THIS GIG WAS MORE
IMPORTANT AND WAS OUT UNTIL THE
WEE HOURS OF THE MORNING.
>> Brown: THERE'S IMMEDIATE
SKEPTICISM TO YOUR MOVE.
ONE PERSON AT USCS SAYS WITHOUT
THE TRANSCRIPT, HOW DO YOU KNOW
THE CAPABILITIES A STUDENT HAS?
>> THERE'S A RISK IN EVERY
PROCESS.
TEST SCORES DO PREDICT ONE THING
AND TEST SCORES IS ONE WAY TO DO
IT.
WE WANT TO GIVE STUDENTS AN
ALTERNATIVE, AGAIN, FOR STUDENTS
WHO EITHER HAVE THE GRADES BUT
THE C FRESHMAN YEAR BOTHERS THEM
AND THEY'RE NOT SURE IF THEY CAN
GET INTO COLLEGE, I WANT TO
INVITE THEM TO APPLY FOR
COLLEGE.
FOR STUDENTS WHO DON'T HAVE A
GREAT TRANSCRIPT BUT HAVE A
PASSION FOR LEARNING, THEY
SHOULD HAVE A CHANCE TO GO TO
COLLEGE.
THIS IS ABOUT FINDING POTENTIAL.
COLLEGE SHOULD NOT BE BASED ON
JUST PAST PERFORMANCE BUT FUTURE
POTENTIAL.
>> Brown: WHEN YOU SAY A GREAT
VIDEO, WHAT IS IT -- BECAUSE
THIS WILL BE THE OTHER AREA OF
SKEPTICISM OR QUESTION, WHAT IS
IT THAT YOU COULD ACTUALLY LEARN
IN A TWO-MINUTE VIDEO?
>> FIRST, YOU KNOW, AS A
JOURNALIST, LET'S NOT TRIVIALIZE
THE DIFFICULTY OF PUTTING
TOGETHER A STORY IN TWO MINUTES
AND TELLING IT AS A DIGITAL
THAT'NARRATIVE.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT, FAIR
ENOUGH.
>> THIS IS NOW A CURRENCY THAT
STUDENTS UNDERSTAND.
EVERYBODY HAS A LAPTOP,
EVERYBODY CAN WRITE AN ESSAY FOR
COLLEGE.
WELL, NO, ACTUALLY NOT EVERYONE
HAS A LAPTOP AND NOT EVERYONE
HAD A GREAT ENGLISH TEACHER OR
GREAT A.P. COURSES AT HIGH
SCHOOL OR A TUTOR THAT COULD
HELP THEM.  A TWO-MINUTE VIDEO
CAN LEVEL THE PLAYING FIELD AND
MOST 18-YEAR-OLDS HAVE SEEN
SOME, MADE SOME, AND EVERYBODY
HAS A PHONE.
IT'S HARD TO WRITE A COLLEGE
ESSAY ON A PHONE IF THE PHONE IS
THE ONLY DEVICE YOU HAVE.
BUT YOU CAN USE THE PHONE TO
MAKE A VIDEO OF YOURSELF AND A
KIND OF AUTHENTICITY.
REMEMBER, I CAN'T TELL THAT YOU
ACTUALLY WROTE YOUR ESSAY.
THERE ARE PLENTY OF TUTORS AND
TEACHERS.
IF YOU'RE SENDING THE ESSAY TO
DOZENS OF COLLEGES, YOU'VE
PROBABLY WORKED ON DOZENS OF
ITERATIONS FOR OTHER PEOPLE.
THIS IS JUST A VIDEO FOR GOUCHER
COLLEGE.
NO POINTS FOR PRODUCTION
QUALITY.
I JUST WANT TO SEE YOU AND YOU
TELLING ME WHY YOU THINKEE'RE A
GREAT FIT FOR GROUPER COLLEGE.
>> Brown: WE LOOK AT A LOT OF
HIGHER EDUCATION ISSUES IN THE
PROGRAM.
ARE THERE SORT OF A TWO-TIER
SYSTEM IN WHICH YOU HAVE SOME
SCHOOLS OVERWHELMED WITH
APPLICATION AND PICK VERY FEW
AND MANY MORE, ESPECIALLY
LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGES, THAT
YOU'RE FAMILIAR WITH INCLUDING
GROUCHER THAGOUCHER, THAT HAVE R
APPLICANTS.
HOW DOES THIS FIT INTO THAT?
>> FIRST IT IS TRUE THE COMMON
APPLICATION HAS MADE IT EASIER
TO APPLY TO MULTIPLE COLLEGES.
YOU CAN CHECK A BOX WHICH MEANS
EVERYBODY'S YIELD HAS GONE DOWN
BECAUSE STUDENTS ARE APPLYING TO
MORE COLLEGES.
BUT AT GOUCHER COLLEGE, WE HAVE
PLENTY OF APPLICATIONS.
WE HAVE 8,000 APPLICATIONS A
YEAR FOR A CLASS OF 400, SO
THERE ARE PLENTY OF STUDENTS.
AGAIN, WE'LL CONTINUE TO TAKE
TRANSCRIPTS AND THE COMMON APP
AND ALL THAT, BUT WE WANTED TO
GET INTO A CONVERSATION WITH
MORE STUDENTS AND DIFFERENT
STUDENTS.
GOUCHER IS A PLACE THAT VALUES
DIVERSITY OF THINKING IN EVERY
WAY AND WE HAVE A LONG TRADITION
OF THAT.
SO I WANTED TO FIND A WAY TO
INVITE STUDENTS WHO MIGHT NOT
THT TEST SCORES
OR GRADES OR THE BACKGROUND FOR
LIBERAL ARTS EDUCATION TO THINK
WE REALLY WANT YOU TO APPLY TO
THIS AND ALL YOU HAVE TODO
SEND US THIS TWO-MINUTE VIDEO.
IT'S THE FIRST STEP.
IT'S NOT THE COMPLETE PICTURE,
BUT IT IS A WAY TO SAY, THIS IS
GOOD, YOU'RE ACCEPTED TO
COLLEGE, YOU CAN COME.
>> Brown: JOSE ANTONIO BOWEN,
PRESIDENT OF GOUCHER COLLEGE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: TO POLITICS
TONIGHT, AND TWO VERY DIFFERENT
STORIES.
FIRST, A JURY TODAY FOUND FORMER
VIRGINIA GOVERNOR BOB MCDONNELL,
A ONE-TIME RISING STAR IN THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY, WAS FOUND
GUILTY ON ELEVEN CORRUPTION-
RELATED CHARGES.
HE COULD FACE YEARS IN PRISON.
MCDONNELL'S WIFE, MAUREEN WAS
ALSO ON TRIAL AND FOUND GUILTY
ON NINE OF FORTEEN COUNTS.
BOB HOLTZ WORTH, WE WELCOME
YOU TO THE PROGRAM.
FIRST OF ALL, REMIND US W
GOVERNOR McDONNELL AND HIS
WIFE WERE CHARGED WITH AND WHAT
ARE THEY BEING FOUND GUILTY OF.
>> WELL, THEY WERE CHARGED WITH
11 COUNTS OF CONSPIRACY TO
OBTAIN GOODS UNDER THE COLOR OF
OFFICIAL RIGHT.
THEY WERE CHARGED WITH
ESSENTIALLY BRIBERY AND FRAUD.
THEY WERE ALSO CHARGED WITH TWO
COUNTS OF BANK FRAUD.
THEY WERE FOUND NOT GUILTY ON
THE TWO COUNTS OF BANK FRAUD BUT
ON ALL THE KEY CHARGES DEALING
WITH PUBLIC CORRUPTION, FRAUD
AND BRIBERY, THE JURY FOUND
GOVERNOR BOB McDONNELL GUILTY
AND FOUND MAUREEN McDONNELL
GUILTY OF MOST OF THEM.
>> Woodruff: SOME OF US WERE
FOLLOWING THE REPORTS OF THE
TRIAL AS IT WENT ALONG.
WHAT HAPPENED TO THE DEFENSE
ARGUMENT THAT THE McDONNELLS
WERE SIMPLY DOING WHAT EVERY
GOVERNOR DOES, THAT HE MEETS
WITH A LOT OF PEOPLE, DOES
FAVORS FOR PEOPLE, ONLY IN THE
COURSE OF BEING GOVERNOR?
>> I THINK WHAT HAPPENED HERE IS
THAT THE JURY REJECTED EVERY
ELEMENT OF THE DEFENSE'S
ARGUMENT, AND ON THE POINT THAT
YOU JUST MADE, JUDY, WHAT THEY
SUGGESTED WAS THAT, FIRST, BOB
McDONNELL, ACCORDING TO JURY,
BASICALLY TOOK A BRIBE FROM
JOHNNIE WILLIAMS WHO CAME INTO
THE GOVERNOR'S OFFICE AND
OFFERED HIM A LOAN AT SWEETHEART
TERMS.
SAID HE WOULD GIVE HIM $50,000,
WOULDN'T HAVE TO REPAY UNTIL
FOUR YEARS LATER WHEN HE LEFT
THE GOVERNORSHIP AND AFTER THAT
2%, AND AFTER THAT HE SAID THERE
IS GOING TO BE NO DOCUMENTATION
AT ALL, WE CAN JUST DO IT ON A
HANDSHAKE.
WHEN BOB McDONNELL DID THAT, I
THINK THAT STARTED THE COURSE
WHERE THE JURY EVENTUALLY
REACHED ITS CONCLUSION TODAY
BECAUSE WHAT IT THEN SUGGESTED
IS THAT SIMPLY BY CONCEALING
THAT, THE PROSECUTION SUGGESTED,
AND THE FACT THAT BOB
McDONNELL TOOK SOME ACTIONS
THAT, EVEN IF THEY WERE
RELATIVELY ROUTINE, AFTER HE HAD
RECEIVED THAT BRIBE FROM
MR. WILLIAMS, HE SHOULD BE FOUND
GUILTY OF TAKING AN OFFICIAL ACT
ON HIS BEHALF AFTER RECEIVING
THAT BRIBE.
THE DEFENSE TIME AND AGAIN
SUGGESTED BOB McDONNELL DID
NOTHING UNUSUAL FOR
MR. WILLIAMS, BUT WHEN THE JUDGE
INSTRUCTED THE JURY, HE SAID AN
OFFICIAL ACT DIDN'T HAVE TO BE
SOMETHING UNIQUE OR UNUSUAL, IT
COULD BE SOMETHING TAKEN IN THE
NORMAL COURSE OF EVENTS, AND
ONCE THE JURY CONNECTED THAT ACT
TO WHAT THEY CONSIDERED TO BE
THE BRIBE, BOB McDONNELL FOUND
IT VERY, VERY DIFFICULT TO
WITHSTAND THE JURY'S TODAY.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THE
STORY WE WERE HEARING FROM THE
DK DONNELL DEFENSE THAT
BASICALLY THE GOVERNOR AND HIS
WIFE WERE HAVING MARITAL
DIFFICULTIES AND, THEREFORE,
COULDN'T POSSIBLY HAVE WORKED
TOGETHER TO TRY TO ARRANGE
FAVORS FROM THIS BUSINESSMAN?
>> WELL, IT SEEMS VERY CLEAR
THAT THE JURY REJECTED THIS
DEFENSE ABSOLUTELY UNIFORMLY,
THAT THEY SIMPLY DIDN'T BELIEVE
THAT IT WAS THE CASE.
THE PROSECUTION ARGUED THAT IT
DIDN'T MATTER, THEY SAID THEY
CERTAINLY COMMUNICATED ENOUGH TO
ACT IN CONCERT AND, IN SOME
ELEMENTS OF THE CASE, THE
PROSECUTION DEMONSTRATED THAT.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN ONE OF THE KEY
E-MAILS MAUREEN McDONNELL SENT
TO ONE OF GOVERNOR BOB
McDONNELL'S CLOSED A VISORS,
THEY WERE ABLE TO PROVE THAT
EMAIL WAS SENT WHILE MAUREEN WAS
SITTING NEXT TO GOVERNOR BOB
McDONNELL IN HIS SUV.
>> Woodruff: AND SOMEONE WHO'S
WATCHED VIRGINIA POLITICS FOR A
LONG TIME, BOB HOLTZWORTH, WHAT
ARE YOU MAKING OF THIS FIRST
TIME A VIRGINIA GOVERNOR HAS
BEEN FOUND GUILTY OF A FELONY?
>> WELL, IT'S CERTAINLY A DAY OF
INFAMY IN VIRGINIA.
IT'S A DAY OVER INFAMY FOR BOB
McDONNELL IN THAT IT HURT HIS
REPUTATION IN A WAY UNIMAGINABLE
A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO AND A
DYNAMITE CHARGE IN THE CULTURE
OF VIRGINIA POLITICS BECAUSE WE
HAVE VERY STRICT LAWS ABOUT GIFT
AND THOSE KINDS OF THINGS AND
BOB McDONNELL IN HIS TRIAL
NOTED HE DID NOT BREAK ANY
VIRGINIA LAW, THAT HE WAS VERY
CAREFUL IN HOW HE PARSED THINGS
NOT TO GO BEYOND THE BOUNDS OF
ANY VIRGINIA LAW.
AND WHAT THIS SHOWS IN THAT HE
WAS CONVICTED TODAY IS THAT
THESE LENIENT VIRGINIA LA
ACTUALLY PROVIDE NOT MUCH
PROTECTION FOR POLITICAL FIGURES
WHO MIGHT ENGAGE IN LONE AND
GIFT TAKING AND THE -- IN LOAN
AND GIFT TAKING AND THE LYING
AND THAT BOB McDONNELL WAS
SEEN BY A JURY AS VIOLATING
FEDERAL LAWS ON A SERVICES FRAUD
AND TAKING PROPERTY UNDER THE
COLOR OF OFFICIAL RIGHT.
AND SO I THINK THIS IS GOING TO
HAVE A DRAMATIC IMPACT ON EVERY
ELECTED OFFIINIA IN
TERMS OF HOW THEY THINK ABOUT
ACCEPTING GIFTS OR LOANS OR
TRIPS THAT THEY'RE LIKELY TO
RECEIVE FROM LOBBYISTS AND OTHER
INTEREST GROUPS IN THE STATE.
>> JUST A REMARKABLE COME-DOWN
STORY.
BOB HOLTZWORTH, WE THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff:
>> Woodruff: THE OTHER BIG
POLITICAL STORY OF THE PAST 24
HOURS IS FROM KANSAS.
THE SENATE RACE THERE GREW MUCH
MORE INTERESTING LATE YESTERDAY
AFTER DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATE CHAD
TAYLOR ABRUPTLY ANNOUNCED HE WAS
DROPPING OUT OF THE RACE.
THAT LEAVES INDEPENDENT GREG
ORMAN TO FACE OFF AGAINST
VETERAN REPUBLICAN INCUMBENT PAT
ROBERTS, WHO LAST MONTH SURVIVED
A TEA PARTY PRIMARY CHALLENGE.
AND ALL OF IT COULD HAVE
FAR-REACHING CONSEQUENCES FOR
CONTROL OF THE U.S. SENATE.
FOR MORE ON WHAT THE
DEVELOPMENTS COULD MEAN, I SPOKE
TO JONATHAN MARTIN EARLIER
TODAY.
HE'S NATIONAL POLITICAL
CORRESPONDENT FOR "THE NEW YORK
TIMES."
JONATHAN MARTIN, THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US AT THE "NewsHour"
AGAIN.
WHY DID THIS DEMOCRATIC
CANDIDATE CHAD TAYLOR SUDDENLY
PULL OUT TWO MONTHS BEFORE THE
ELECTION?
>> WELL, BECAUSE, QUIETLY, THERE
HAS BEEN PRESSURE ON HIM TO GET
OUT BECAUSE THERE IS A
WELL-FUNDED, INDEPENDENT
CANDIDATE WHO DEMOCRATS THINK
MAY ACTUALLY HAVE A SHOT TO BEAT
SENATOR ROBERTS THIS FALL.
PAT ROBERTS IS SOMEONE WHO'S
NEVER REALLY HAD A RACE.
HE'S BEEN IN WASHINGTON SINCE
1980 WHEN HE FIRST CAME TO THE
HOUSE, TO THE SENATE IN 1996,
NEVER RECEIVED BELOW 60%.
WHY IS IT DIFFERENT NOW?
BECAUSE HE IS SOMEBODY WHO'S
BEEN ATTACKED FROM THE RIGHT FOR
THE ENTIRE YEAR, A TOUGH PRIMARY
FROM A TEA PARTY OPPONENT, MADE
A FEW GAPS ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL
THAT ARE CONNECTED TO THE FACT
THAT HE DOES NOT HAVE A HOME OF
HIS OWN IN KANSAS ANYMORE.
HIS PRIMARY HOME IS IN
ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA, IN THE
WASHINGTON SUBURBS.
SO HE WAS VULNERABLE TO A
PRIMARY CHALLENGE, WON HIS
PRIMARY IN AUGUST BUT ONLY GOT
48% OF THE VOTE.
THERE WAS POLLING IN THE WEEKS
AFTER THAT THAT SHOWED THIS
THIRD-PARTY CANDIDATE WHO,
AGAIN, HAS BEEN ON TV BECAUSE HE
HAS MONEY, WAS COMPETITIVE WITH
ROBERTS AND DEMOCRATS BELIEVE
THAT IF THEIR OWN NOMINEE WAS TO
GET OFF THE BALLOT AND THEY
COULD MAKE THE INDEPENDENT THE
DE FACTO DEMOCRATIC NOMINEE,
THEY WOULD HAVE A SHOT TO PULL
OFF ONE OF THE BIGGEST UPSETS IN
SENATE HISTORY AND BEAT PAT
ROBERTS IN KANSAS, A STATE WHICH
HAS NOT SENT A DEMOCRAT TO THE
U.S. SENATE SINCE 1932.
>> Woodruff: IT WOULD BE
HISTORIC BY POLITICAL STANDARDS.
REPUBLICANS, THOUGH, ARE SAYING
CHAD TAYLOR OF THE DEMOCRATS
THAT THERE'S SOME CORRUPTION
INVOLVED, THAT SOMETHING THAT
MAY EVEN NEED TO BE
INVESTIGATED.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT THAT?
>> WELL, THE BIG NEWS TODAY,
JUDY,  THE SECRETARY OF STATE
IN KANSAS REPUBLICAN CRISCO VAC
WHO OVERSEES ELECTION LAW IS
SAYING MR. TAYLOR THE DEMOCRAT
CAN'T COME OFF THE BALLOT
BECAUSE THE KANSAS LAW INDICATES
YOU CAN ONLY DO SO IF YOU HAVE
SHOWN THE INABILITY TO PERFORM
THE DUTIES OF OFFICE AND
SECRETARY OF STATE KOVAC HAS
SAYING MR. TAYLOR HAS DONE NO
SUCH THING AND WILL BE CAPABLE
TO SERVE AND CAN'T COME OFF THE
BALLOT, SO THAT BRINGS THE
QUESTION IS THE DEMOCRAT HIMSELF
ACTUALLY GOING TO BE ON THE
BALLOT.
KEEP IN MIND, THEY HAVE TO PRINT
THE BALLOT SOON BECAUSE THEY
HAVE TO ISSUE ABSENTEE BALLOTS
FOR OVERSEAS VOTERS.
SO WE MAY SEE LITIGATION IN THE
DAYS AHEAD AND WE YOU CAN HAVE A
DEMOCRAT ON THE BALLOT WHO IS
NOT CAMPAIGNING, BASICALLY
SAYING DON'T VOTE FOR ME:  IT'S
A REMARKABLE SCENARIO.
>> Woodruff: SENATOR ROBERTS
MAY BE VULNERABLE NOW.
THIS INDEPENDENT CANDIDATE GREG
ORMAN, HOW WOULD HE VOTE?
HE SAYS HE'S INDEPENDENT.
WOULD HE VOTE DEMOCRATIC IF HE
WERE ELECTED?
WHAT ARE HIS POSITION ON THE
ISSUES?
>> HIS POLITICS SEEM TO BE SORT
OF CENTRIST POLITICS.
HIS CONSULTANTS ARE DEMOCRATIC
CONSULTANTS.
HE'S OBVIOUSLY SOMEBODY
DEMOCRATS THINK COULD CAUCUS
WITH THEM NEXT YEAR IF HE WINS.
KEEP IN MIND THERE ARE TWO
INDEPENDENTS CURRENTLY IN THE
SENATE BOTH WHO WOULD CAUCUS
WITH DEMOCRATS AND INDICATION IS
HE WOULD CAST HIS VOTE WITH
HARRY REID DEMOCRATIC LEADER.
>> Woodruff: BUT OVERALL, THIS
IS A HUGE HEADACHE FOR
REPUBLICANS, I HEAR YOU SAYING.
THEY WANT VERY MUCH TO BECOME
THE MAJORITY IN THE SENATE AND
THIS MAKES IT HARDER.
>> THEY'RE ON A DOORSTEP OF
RETAKING THE SENATE.
THEY NEED SIX SEATS, THREE OF
PEOPLE PROBABLY IN THE BAG, AND
NOW THEY HAVE A COMPLICATION
HERE BECAUSE, IN A YEAR WHERE
THEY'RE MOSTLY ON OFFENSE, THE
REPUBLICANS ARE, THEY NOW HAVE
TO PLAY DEFENSE IN THE MOST
UNLIKELY OF STATES, KANSAS,
WHICH AGAIN HAS NOT HAD A
DEMOCRAT IN THE SENATE SINCE THE
HOOVER ERA.
>> Woodr A STORY WE WILL
BE WATCHING.
ANOTHER TWO MONTHS TO GO.
JONATHAN MARTIN, "NEW YORK
TIMES," THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: THE ALGAE BLOOM
THAT TURNED PART OF LAKE ERIE
TOXIC JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO IS
BRINGING A NEW LEVEL OF
ATTENTION TO RUNOFF AND SEVERAL
OTHER TROUBLES IN THE GREAT
LAKES.
YESTERDAY, THE E.P.A. ANNOUNCED
IT WILL PROVIDE TWELVE MILLION
DOLLARS TO THE REGION TO HELP
ADDRESS THOSE PROBLEMS.
REPORTER CHRISTY MCDONALD OF
DETROIT PUBLIC TELEVISION HAS
OUR STORY.
>> Reporter: LAKE ERIE HAS LONG
BEEN CONSIDERED THE CANARY IN
THE COAL MINE FOR THE GREAT
LAKES SYSTEM.
THE SOUTHERNMOST, WARMEST, AND
SHALLOWEST OF THE FIVE LAKES,
ERIE PROVIDES AN IDEAL HABITAT
FOR AN UNWELCOME SUMMER VISITOR,
ALGAE, PARTICULARLY THE TOXIC
KIND THAT CAUSED DRINKING WATER
PROBLEMS FOR TOLEDO, OHIO,
SEVERAL WEEKS AGO.
AND THAT MAKES IT AN IDEAL PLACE
TO LOOK FOR SOLUTIONS TO THAT
PROBLEM.
HERE AT THE STONE LAB IN PUTIN
BAY, OHIO, THEY'VE BEEN STUDYING
ALGAL BLOOMS SINCE THE 70S.
AT THAT TIME, SIGNIFICANT
IMPROVEMENTS WERE MADE TO SEWAGE
TREATMENT PLANTS USHERING IN 30
YEARS OF IMPROVED HEALTH FOR
LAKE ERIE.
BUT IN THE EARLY 2,000s, LARGE
ALGAL BLOOMS STARTED TO RE-
APPEAR, WITH THE WORST ON RECORD
OCCURRING IN 2011.
FOR JEFF REUTTER, DIRECTOR OF
THE OHIO SEA GRANT COLLEGE AND
STONE LAB AT OHIO STAT
UNIVERSITY, THAT ALGAE BLOOM WAS
LIKE NOTHING HE'D SEEN BEFORE.
>> THE BLOOM IN 2011 REALLY GOT
EVERYBODY'S ATTENTION.
THAT BLOOM WAS TWO-AND-A-HALF
TIMES WORSE THAN ANYTHING WE'D
EVER SEEN BEFORE AND IT WAS
REALLY A BLOOM LIKE I'D NEVER
EXPERIENCED AND I'VE BEEN
WORKING ON LAKE ERIE SINCE 1971,
AND I'VE SEEN THESE BEFORE BUT
I'D NEVER SEEN A BLOOM WHERE
WHEN YOU HIT IT WITH A BOAT, IT
ACTUALLY SLOWED YOU DOWN.
IT WAS THAT DENSE.
>> Reporter: HE BELIEVES THAT
BLOOM AND OTHERS LIKE IT ARE
CAUSED BY EXCESS POTASSIUM,
NITROGEN AND OTHER BY-PRODUCTS
OF FERTILIZER RUN OFF FROM THE
FARMS AND TOWNS THAT SURROUND
LAKE ERIE.
>> THE ALGAE ARE VERY MUCH LIKE
THE GRASS ON OUR LAWNS.
YOU KNOW, YOU PUT FERTILIZER ON
IT.
IT'S GONNA HAVE NITROGEN,
POTASSIUM, PHOSPHORUS.
IT'S GONNA MAKE YOUR GRASS GROW.
WE PUT IT IN LAKE ERIE, AND WE
GET ALGAE.
>> Reporter: REUTTER SAYS THOSE
INGREDIENTS CAN BE COMING FROM A
VARIETY OF SOURCES.
>> WHEN WE LOOK AT DIFFERENT
PLACES AROUND THE COUNTRY WHERE
THEY'RE HAVING HARMFUL ALGAL
BLOOMS SOME OF THEM ARE GOING TO
BE DRIVEN BY AGRICULTURAL
LOADING BUT SOME OF THEM ARE
GOING TO BE POOR SEWAGE
TREATMENT PLANTS OR A BUNCH OF
FAILING SEPTIC TANKS BUT IN LAKE
ERIE IT'S PRIMARILY AGRICULTURE.
>> Reporter: AND CLIMATE CHANGE
IS PROVING TO BE AN AGGRAVATING
FACTOR.
>> MOST OF THE PHOSPHORUS THAT
COMES INTO THE LAKE PROBABLY
OVER 80% COMES IN DURING STORMS.
CLIMATE CHANGE LEADS TO MORE
FREQUENT SEVERE STORMS.
AND IF WE HAVE MOST OF THE
PHOSPHOROUS COMING IN FROM
AGRICULTURAL RUN OFF, COMBINED
SEWER OVERFLOWS, RUN-OFF OFF OUR
LAWNS, IF MOST OF THAT'S COMING
IN DURING STORM EVENTS AND YOU
HAVE MORE STORM EVENTS YOU'RE
SIMPLY GOING TO GET MORE
PHOSPHOROUS, IT'S THAT SIMPLE.
>> Reporter: AND MORE
PHOSPHOROUS ENCOURAGES THE
GROWTH OF A FORM OF ALGAE KNOWN
AS CYANOBACTERIA.
IT PRODUCES MICROCYSTIN THE MAIN
TOXIN OF CONCERN ON LAKE ERIE.
AND ALTHOUGH TOLEDO'S RECENT
BLOOM WAS ACTUALLY QUITE SMALL,
THE DENSEST PORTION OF THE
HARMFUL ALGAE CLUSTERED RIGHT
OVER THE INTAKE FOR THE CITY'S
WATER TREATMENT PLANT TURNING
THE TAP WATER TOXIC.
JUSTIN CHAFFIN, RESEARCH
COORDINATOR AT THE STONE LAB,
TESTS SAMPLES FROM SURROUNDING
WATER TREATMENT FACILITIES TO
MONITOR WHETHER THE WATER IS
SAFE FOR DRINKING.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT SOME OF YOUR
KNOWN TOXINS THAT YOU'RE
FAMILIAR WITH, MICROCYSTIN IS
ABOUT ON PAR BEING TOXICITY WITH
SOMETHING LIKE CYANIDE AND IT'S
JUST BELOW DIOXIN, SO IT'S A
REALLY POTENT TOXIN.
>> Reporter: THE UNITED STATES
HAS NO NATIONAL STANDARD FOR
THESE TOXINS, BUT OHIO HAS
ADOPTED THE STANDARDS OF THE
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION WHICH
RECOMMENDS ONE PART PER BILLION
FOR DRINKING WATER.
ON AUGUST 2, 2014, THE TOXIN
LEVELS IN TOLEDO'S WATER CAME IN
AT 3 PARTS PER BILLION.
YET, THE MOST ALARMING ASPECT OF
THAT TOXIC BLOOM IS THAT IT
ARRIVED IN EARLY AUGUST.
>> IT WAS MUCH EARLIER THAN WE
HAD ANTICIPATED SEEING A REALLY
BAD BLOOM.
SCARY FOR ALL OF US BECAUSE WE
KNOW THIS BLOOM IS GOING TO STAY
AROUND HERE UNTIL WELL INTO
OCTOBER, MAYBE THE END OF
OCTOBER AND IT PROBABLY WON'T
REACH ITS PEAK UNTIL SEPTEMBER.
THE BIG CONCERNS ARE THE WORST
IS LIKELY STILL YET TO COME.
>> Reporter: CHAFFIN HAS ALSO
BEEN STUDYING THE TOXIC ALGAE ON
A MOLECULAR LEVEL.
HIS FINDINGS PROVIDE SOME CLUES
INTO HOW WE MAY BE ABLE TO STOP
THESE BLOOMS FROM SPREADING.
>> DURING THAT SUMMER OF 2011 WE
DID A MOLECULAR STUDY WHERE WE
TRACKED THE CYANOBACTERIA, THE
MICROCYSTIS BLOOM, THROUGHOUT
THE LAKE AND THROUGHOUT TIME.
NOW THAT CYANOBACTERIA BLOOM
THAT STARTED IN MAUMEE BAY IN
MID JULY WAS THE SAME
MICROCYSTIS THAT ENDED UP OFF OF
CLEVELAND IN OCTOBER.
WITH THAT MOLECULAR STUDY WE
KNOW THAT IF WE STOP A BLOOM IN
MAUMEE BAY WE'LL STOP A BLOOM BY
CLEVELAND OR BY SANDUSKY.
IF WE STOP IT IN MAUMEE BAY THE
REST OF THE LAKE SHOULD BE GOOD.
>> Reporter: CURRENTLY, THE ONLY
WAY TO STOP A BLOOM FROM MOVING
IS TO STOP IT FROM FORMING IN
THE FIRST PLACE.
AND THE ONLY WAY TO ACCOMPLISH
THAT IS TO REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF
PHOSPHOROUS COMING INTO THE
LAKE.
>> I DON'T THINK ANYBODY THINKS
THAT WE'RE GONNA MAKE IT COLDER
REAL SOON.
SO WE CAN'T ADDRESS CLIMATE
CHANGE TO SAY WELL THE
SOLUTION'S CLIMATE CHANAL
WE GOTTA DO IS STOP IT.
THE ONLY THING THAT WE CAN
CONTROL IS PHOSPHORUS LOAD, AND
THAT MEANS WE HAVE TO CHANGE OUR
BEHAVIOR.
OUR GOAL HAS TO BE TO REDUCE THE
PHOSPHOROUS BY ABOUT 40%.
BUT THAT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT I
THINK ANYBODY BELIEVES IS GONNA
HAPPEN REAL QUICKLY SO THE FIRST
THING THAT WE HAVE TO DO IS ARM
OUR WATER TREATMENT PLANTS WITH
THE RIGHT TECHNOLOGY, THE TOOLS,
MAKE SURE THAT THE PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND, THE PEOPLE THAT
MANAGE THE PLANTS UNDERSTAND HOW
TO TAKE THE TOXINS OUT THAT COME
INTO THE PLANT BECAUSE CLEARLY
TOXINS WILL COME IN.
WE ARE NOW ENTERING INTO PRIME
ALGAL BLOOM SEASON, SOME WATER
TREATMENT FACILITIES ARE TESTING
FOR THE TOXINS, BUT THOSE TESTS
AREN'T MANDATORY.
MUNICIPALITIES CAN ONLY LOOK TO
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH FROM PLACES
LIKE STONE LAB TO UNDERSTAND AND
TO PREPARE FOR THE POSSIBLE
THREAT TO THEIR WATER SUPPLY.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
THE MOST POPULAR SPORT IN
AMERICA TRIES TO COME TO TERMS
WITH ONE OF ITS BIGGEST
PROBLEMS, CONCUSSIONS AND THE
IMPACT OF VIOLENCE ON ITS
PLAYERS.
BUT WILL CHANGES IN THE GAME BE
ENOUGH?
JEFF IS BACK WITH THAT.
>> Reporter: EARLIER THIS WEEK,
THE SUPER BOWL CHAMPION SEATTLE
SEAHAWKS PRACTICED FOR TONIGHT'S
KICK-OFF OF A NEW N.F.L. SEASON.
ONE THAT WILL NO DOUBT COME WITH
SPECTACULAR THRILLS, AND,
INEVITABLY, THE INJURIES OF A
VIOLENT GAME.
THE LEAGUE IS INTRODUCING
SEVERAL NEW RULES AIMED AT
PREVENTING HEAD INJURIES.
INCLUDING TIGHTER REGULATION OF
ILLEGAL CONTACT BETWEEN DEFENSES
AND WIDE RECEIVERS AND A
PROHIBITION OF HAND-TO-FACE
CONTACT.
IN FACT, THE N.F.L.'S HEALTH AND
SAFETY COMMITTEE REPORTED
OVERALL CONCUSSIONS WERE DOWN
13% LAST SEASON FROM THE
PREVIOUS YEAR.
AND THE NUMBER OF CONCUSSIONS
SPECIFICALLY SUFFERED FROM
HELMET-TO-HELMET CONTACT
DECREASED 23%.
BUT THOUSANDS OF ATHLETES AND
FAMILY MEMBERS ALLEGE THAT FOR
DECADES THE LEAGUE HID
INFORMATION LINKING HEAD TRAUMA
TO AN ARRAY OF NEUROLOGICAL
DISEASES LIKE DEMENTIA.
LAST YEAR, THE N.F.L. WHILE
ADMITTING NO WRONGDOING REACHED
A PROPOSED $765 MILLION
SETTLEMENT WITH MORE THAN 4,500
FORMER PLAYERS SUING OVER
CONCUSSIONS SUFFERED ON THE
FIELD.
IN JULY, A FEDERAL JUDGE GAVE
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL.
A FINAL DECISION IS EXPECTED
AFTER A NOVEMBER HEARING.
FORMER PLAYERS AND FAMILIES CAN
ALSO ELECT TO OPT OUT OF THE
SETTLEMENT.
AND YESTERDAY, THE FAMILY OF
LATE SAN DIEGO CHARGERS STAR
JUNIOR SEAU DID JUST THAT,
SAYING IT WOULD PURSUE A
WRONGFUL DEATH SUIT AGAINST THE
LEAGUE.
SEAU COMMITTED SUICIDE IN 2012
AT THE AGE OF 43.
POSTHUMOUS TESTS SHOWED HE
SUFFERED FROM C.T.E., A
DEGENERATIVE BRAIN ILLNESS
CAUSED BY REPEATED BLOWS TO THE
HEAD.
LET'S TAKE A LOOK AT SOME OF
THESE CHANGES ANDHE Q TSTIOUENS
WITH TWO PEOPLE INTIMATELY
INVOLVED WITH THE GAME.
DEMAURICE SMITH IS EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE N.F.L. PLAYERS
ASSOCIATION-- THEIR UNION.
DR. MATTHEW MATAVA IS TEAM
PHYSICIAN FOR THE ST. LOUIS RAMS
AND PRESIDENT OF THE N.F.L.
PHYSICIANS SOCIETY.
HE DOES NOT SPEAK FOR THE LEAGUE
ITSELF.
WE DID ASK THE LEAGUE TO JOIN US
TONIGHT, BUT THEY DECLINED OUR
INVITATION.
DEMAURICE SMITH, LEM START WITH
YOU.
WHAT ARE THE MOST MEANINGFUL
CHANGES YOUR PLAYERS WILL
EXPERIENCE THAT FANS WILL SEE
TONIGHT AIMED AT PREVENTING HEAD
INJURIES?
GIVE US AN EXAMPLE.
>> HOPEFULLY, IT WILL BE NOTHING
FANS SEE BECAUSE THE BEST
LIKELIHOOD OR RESULT WE COULD
HOPE FOR IS NONE OF OUR PLAYERS
ARE IN HEAD-TO-HEAD OR
HEAD-TO-GROUND CONTACT THAT
COULD CAUSE A CONCUSSION.
I DO THINK MOST OF THE TELLING
OR IMPORTANT CHANGES WILL BE
THINGS THAT MIGHT BE
IMPERCEPTIBLE TO FANS.
FOR EXAMPLE, HAVING NEUTRAL
SIDELINE CONCUSSION EXPERTS ON
THE SIDELINE, INCREASED DOCTOR
ACCOUNTABILITY TO THE PLAYERS,
INCREASED GUIDELINES THAT LIMIT
CONTACT, AS WE HAVE FOR THE LAST
THREE YEARS DURING TRAINING
CAMPS, THOSE ARE THE THINGS THAT
ARE MOST LIKELY GOING TO HAVE AN
IMPACT ON DECREASING CONCUSSIONS
BY DECREASING EXPOSURE TO THINGS
THAT MIGHT LEAD TO CONCUSSIONS.
>> Brown: DR. MATAVA, THERE
HAS BEEN SO MUCH TALK OVER THE
YEARS ABOUT THE TEAM PHYSICIANS
AND TEAMS THEMSELVES DIDN'T DO
ENOUGH TO GET PLAYERS OFF THE
FIELD, DIDN'T TAKE THIS
SERIOUSLY ENOUGH.
WERE TEAMS AND PHYSICIANS TOO
LENIENT IN THE PAST AND ARE
THERE NOW SPECIFIC RULES AND
NORMS THAT WILL CHANGE THAT?
>> LIKE ALL AREAS OF MEDICAL
SCIENCE, THE SCIENCE BEHIND
CONCUSSIONS HAS EVOLVED
SIGNIFICANTLY.
I HAVE BEEN TAKING CARE OF THE
ST. LOUIS RAMS FOR THE PAST 14
YEARS AND THE SCIENCE BEHIND
CONCUSSION MANAGEMENT AND
TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS CHANGED
CONSIDERABLY DURING THAT TIME.
USED TO BE SEVERAL YEARS AGO
WHEN A PLAYER WOULD BE DIAGNOSED
WITH A SO-CALLED BELL RINGER,
THE STANDARD OF CARE WAS TO LET
THEM GO BACK TO PLAY WIUT
LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES.
WE NOW THERE ARE MILDER
CONCUSSIONS THAT COULD BE LINKED
TO PROBLEMS DOWN THE ROAD OR
HIGHER RISK OF CONCUSSIONS.
WITH THIS INCREASED RESEARCH ON
CONCUSSIONS, THERE HAS BEEN A
VAST CHANGE IN THE WAY
PHYSICIANS APPROACH THE INJURY
AS WELL AS THE MANAGEMENT AND
THE LEAGUE AND THE PHYSICIAN'S
SOCIETY TAKE IT SERMS.
PROBABLY THE BIGGEST CHANGE THIS
YEAR ON THE FIELD YOU WON'T EVEN
SEE.
THERE IS ABOUT 27 MEDICAL PEOPLE
IN THE N.F.L. SIDELINE OR IN THE
STADIUM TO EVALUATE AND MANAGE
ANY MEDICAL PROBLEM A PLAYER
MIGHT HAVE.
THERE'S AN INDEPENDENT
NEUROSURGEON ON BOTH SIDES, HOME
AND AWAY TEAM, AND EACH TEAM HAS
AN UNAFFILIATED NEUROSURGEON WHO
HAS TO CLEAR THE PLAYER TO PLAY
EVEN WHEN RELEASED BY HIS OWN
PHYSICIAN.
>> Brown: THE CULTURE IS THERE
YOU HAVE TO BE B FASTER,
HID AS HART AS YOU CAN.
YOUR YOUNG PLAYERS MUST FEEL
IMMORTAL.
HOW DO YOU TELL THEM TO TONE IT
DOWN OR CHANGE THE WAY THEY
PLAY?
>> WELL, I THINK PART OF THE KEY
AND THE DOCTOR TALKED ABOUT IT
IS YOU DON'T REALLY TELL THEM
ANYTHING.
YOU MAKE THEM A PART OF THE
PROCESS WHERE THEY CAN ACTUALLY
IMPACT THE HEALTH AND SAFETY
THAT IS A PART OF THEIR
WORKPLACE.
AND WHAT WE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO DO
WITH THE LEAGUE AND MANY OF THE
THINGS THE DOCTOR'S TALKED
ABOUT, THOSE WERE COLLECTIVELY
BARGAINED.
THOSE WERE THINGS WHERE THE
UNION SAT DOWN WITH MANAGEMENT
AND SAID THOSE WERE THE
CONDITIONS THAT WE WANT FOR OUR
PLAYERS TO PLAY SAFELY.
SO THE THINGS THAT HAVE CHANGED
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS HAVE
BEEN GREAT STRIDES IN FOOTBALL,
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU MEASURE IT
AGAINST SORT OF THE ARC OF
HISTORY AND FOOTBALL OVER THE
LAST 50, 60 YEARS.
I'M HAPPY TO SAY MANY OF THE
THINGS WERE THE RESULT OF
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.
>BARGAINING.
>> Brown: I JUST WONDERED
DEMAURICE SMITH, DO YOU THINK IT
THE FIELD?SIER TO GET PLAYERS
BECAUSE THE CULTURE, OF COURSE,
IS STILL NOT TO COME OFF THE
FIELD.
AND WHAT WILL HAPPEN WHEN THERE
ARE SUSPENSIONS, WHICH WILL BE
INEVITABLE, THERE WILL BE SOME
SUSPENSIONS OF PLAYERS WHO WANT
TO FIGHT THOSE SUSPENSIONS.
>> WELL, EVERY PLAYER IS
ENTITLED TO THEIR DUE PROCESS
AND THAT'S SOMETHING WE WILL
JEALOUSLY AND RIGHTFULLY
PROTECT, BUT I DO THINK THAT THE
REAL GOAL HERE, IS ONE, MAKING
PLAYERS A PART OF THE SYSTEM TO
MAKE THE GAME SAFER, MAKING SURE
THERE ARE PROTOCOLS THAT DOCTORS
AND PLAYERS FOLLOW TO REMOVE
CONCUSSED OR PLAYERS WHO MIGHT
BE CONCUSSED FROM THE FIELD, AND
I THINK ONE OF THE BIGGEST
CHANGES, AGAIN, WAS THE LEAGUE
AND THE PLAYERS UNION COMING TO
A CONCLUSION THAT REFEREES ON
THE SIDELINE CAN ACTUALLY BE
INVOLVED AS FIRST RESPONDERS,
THAT IF THEY SEE A PLAYER WHO
COULD BE HURT, THAT THEY CAN
ACTUALLY STEP IN AND ASK THAT
PLAYER TO STEP TO THE SIDELINE
FOR THE MANDATORY CONCUSSION
PROTOCOL, THOSE ARE THINGS THAT
ARE GOING TO MAKE THIS GAME
SAFER.
>> Brown: DR. MATAVA, AS YOU
SAID, THE SCIENCE OF CONCUSSION
HAS CHANGED AWARENESS AND OUR
CULTURE HAS CHANGED.
THE GAME REMAINS INCREDIBLY
POPULAR NOW BUT IS THERE A FEAR
THAT PERHAPS MORE PARENTS WILL
NOT WANT THEIR KIDS PLAYING,
THAT THERE WILL BE A GROWING
AWARENESS OF THE KIND OF
VIOLENCE AND REPERCUSSIONS, THAT
THE GAME MAY SUFFER?
>> CERTAINLY THERE'S AN
INCREASED AWARENESS FROM
PARENTS.
I SEE IT AT MY PRACTICE IN
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY ALL THE
TIME, PARENTS ASKING ABOUT
FOOTBALL RISK NOT ONLY FOR THE
CONCUSSIONS BUT FOR PARTS OF
THEIR BODY, BUT THEY ALSO ASKED
ME WOULD I LET MY SON PLAY AND I
DID LET MY SON PLAY, BUT I NEVER
TELL A PARENT WHAT THEY SHOULD
DO AS FAR AS THE MANAGEMENT OF
THE KIDS.
I TELL THEM THE GAME IS SAFER
THAN EVER BEFORE.
I HAD HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL.
I HAD THREE CONCUSSIONS AND WE
DIDN'T EVEN DIAGNOSE THEM IN
THOSE DAYS.
I REASSURE PARENTS GREAT STRIDES
HAVE BEEN MADE NOT ONLY IN
FOOTBALL AND CONCUSSION BUT
SPORTS MEDICINE THROUGH MRI,
ARTHROSCOPY AND TESTS IN
GENERAL.
>> Brown: WE LEAVE IT THERE.
DEMAURICE SMITH, DR. MATTHEW
MATAVA.
THANK YOU BOTH SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT ANNOUNCED
A CIVIL RIGHTS INVESTIGATION OF
POLICE PRACTICES IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI.
FORMER VIRGINIA GOVERNOR BOB
MCDONNELL AND HIS WIFE MAUREEN
WERE CONVICTED OF PUBLIC
CORRUPTION.
AND COMEDIAN JOAN RIVERS DIED AT
81.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF, WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE, AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING WITH MARK SHIELDS AND
DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.